[BLOG] From Chaos to Clarity: Revolutionizing OpenSearch Clients and Documentation with a Unified API Specification (#3570)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-02-20-revolutionizing-opensearch-clients-and-documentation-with-a-unified-api-specification.md

---
layout: post
title:  "From chaos to clarity: Revolutionizing OpenSearch clients and documentation using a unified API specification"
authors:
 - xtansia
 - dblock
 - theotr
 - wbeckler
 - saimedhi
 - vachshah
 - kolchfa
 - naarcha

> date: 2025-01-24

Reviewer: Update blog date to 2025-02-13

categories:
 - community

> meta_keywords: API Specification, OpenSearch Clients, OpenSearch Documentation, Code Generation, Automation

Reviewer: Please update the meta with the following: 

_meta_keywords:_ OpenSearch API, OpenAPI specification, API documentation, API generators, OpenSearch documentation, OpenSearch clients

_meta_description:_ Discover how OpenSearch revolutionized its API documentation and client development through unified OpenAPI Specification, enabling automated client generation and improved documentation accuracy across 1,021 API routes.

Author: Updated. Thanks.

Looking ahead, having a complete specification will enable us to rapidly develop new clients in additional programming languages!

## Generating documentation from the specification  

Like the clients, OpenSearch documentation faced challenges keeping pace with the rapid development of OpenSearch server and plugins. The process of manually writing and updating descriptions for each API's parameters, requests, and responses was time-consuming and error-prone. Documentation would occasionally become inconsistent with both the clients and the server, causing user confusion. These inconsistencies created a poor experience for our users made it more difficult for new applications to adopt OpenSearch.

> 

Reviewer 2: Line 57: The first sentence references "the OpenSearch server and plugins", but the penultimate sentence references "the clients and the server". Line 67 references "the server and clients". Should the phrase in the first sentence be "the OpenSearch server and clients", or is "plugins" correct?

Reviewer 3: Plugins is correct. Clients are generated off of OpenSearch core (server) and plugins.

We've begun addressing this by generating documentation components directly from the OpenSearch API specification. For example, [path and query parameter tables are now generated from the spec](https://github.com/opensearch-project/documentation-website/pull/8692), replacing handwritten tables. This process has also helped uncover and correct spec errors.  

In the near future, the following components will also be generated from the spec:  

- Request and response body fields and their descriptions.  

> - Examples of requests and responses, derived from tests in the spec repository.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Examples of requests and responses, derived from tests in the specification repository
```

> - Usage examples for each client language.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Usage examples for each client language
```

> These changes ensure the documentation remains accurate and consistent with the server and clients, creating a better experience for developers and reducing barriers to OpenSearch adoption.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These changes ensure that the documentation remains accurate and consistent with the server and clients, creating a better experience for developers and reducing barriers to OpenSearch adoption.  
```

## Thank you

> Over the past year, it has been rewarding to witness the evolution and improvement of the OpenSearch API specification. The specification now serves as the authoritative reference for OpenSearch clients, documentation, and server, ensuring consistency across all components. We look forward to seeing how the OpenSearch project will continue to grow with the OpenSearch API specification as its foundation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Over the past year, it has been rewarding to witness the evolution and improvement of the OpenSearch API specification. The specification now serves as the authoritative reference for the OpenSearch clients, documentation, and server, ensuring consistency across all components. We look forward to seeing how the OpenSearch Project will continue to grow with the OpenSearch API specification as its foundation.
```

> We couldn't have achieved this without the dedication of our contributors. Their feedback, suggestions, and contributions have been invaluable to the project. The Amazon OpenSearch team would like to give a special thanks to the following contributors for their outstanding work on the OpenSearch API specification:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We couldn't have achieved this without the dedication of our contributors. Their feedback, suggestions, and contributions have been invaluable to the project. We are especially grateful to the following contributors for their outstanding work on the OpenSearch API specification:
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Line 75: Because we don't actually use the name "Tokesh" in the link text, should we use "Niyazbek" in the second sentence?

> * [Niyazbek Torekeldi](https://github.com/Tokesh): For backfilling the OpenSearch API specification with missing APIs and fixing numerous spec errors. Tokesh also helped us reach 100% test coverage for the spec.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Niyazbek Torekeldi](https://github.com/Tokesh): For backfilling the OpenSearch API specification with missing APIs and fixing numerous specification errors. Tokesh also helped us reach 100% test coverage for the specification.
```

> * [Niyazbek Torekeldi](https://github.com/Tokesh): For backfilling the OpenSearch API specification with missing APIs and fixing numerous spec errors. Tokesh also helped us reach 100% test coverage for the spec.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [Niyazbek Torekeldi](https://github.com/Tokesh): For backfilling the OpenSearch API specification with missing APIs and fixing numerous spec errors. Niyazbek also helped us reach 100% test coverage for the spec.
```

> * [Andriy Redko](https://github.com/reta): For his many contributions to the OpenSearch project, especially for sharing his expertise during many discussions about the spec repository.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [Andriy Redko](https://github.com/reta): For his many contributions to the OpenSearch Project, especially for sharing his expertise during many discussions about the specification repository.
```

## Looking ahead  

> We look forward to continuing this journey with you. If you have feedback or suggestions for the OpenSearch API specification, please open an issue in the [OpenSearch API Specification repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-api-specification/issues). Your contributions help shape the future of OpenSearch.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We look forward to continuing this journey with you. If you have feedback or suggestions, please create an issue in the [OpenSearch API Specification repository](https://github.com/opensearch-project/opensearch-api-specification/issues). Your contributions help shape the future of OpenSearch.  
```

The implementation of API generators has transformed our client development process. Instead of manually updating API functions, we can now focus on enhancing client performance, stability, and usability. Using the OpenSearch API specification as the single reference ensures all clients remain synchronized with each other. When developers add a new API to OpenSearch or its plugins, they simply update the specification, and the functionality becomes immediately available across all OpenSearch clients. Similarly, when an API bug is discovered in one client, fixing it in the specification automatically resolves the issue across all clients. The generated API functions also provide much greater consistency in features and behavior compared to their previous handwritten counterparts.

Looking ahead, having a complete specification will enable us to rapidly develop new clients in additional programming languages!

## Generating documentation from the specification  

> Like the clients, OpenSearch documentation faced challenges keeping pace with rapid development. The process of manually writing and updating descriptions for each API's parameters, requests, and responses was time-consuming and error-prone. Documentation would occasionally become inconsistent with both the clients and the server, causing user confusion. These inconsistencies created a poor experience for our users made it more difficult for new applications to adopt OpenSearch.

Author: "with the rapid development of OpenSearch server and plugins"?

- Request and response body fields and their descriptions.  
- Examples of requests and responses, derived from tests in the spec repository.  
- Usage examples for each client language.  

These changes ensure the documentation remains accurate and consistent with the server and clients, creating a better experience for developers and reducing barriers to OpenSearch adoption.  

## Thank you

Over the past year, it has been rewarding to witness the evolution and improvement of the OpenSearch API specification. The specification now serves as the authoritative reference for OpenSearch clients, documentation, and server, ensuring consistency across all components. We look forward to seeing how the OpenSearch project will continue to grow with the OpenSearch API specification as its foundation.

We couldn't have achieved this without the dedication of our contributors. Their feedback, suggestions, and contributions have been invaluable to the project. The Amazon OpenSearch team would like to give a special thanks to the following contributors for their outstanding work on the OpenSearch API specification:

> * [Niyazbek Torekeldi](https://github.com/Tokesh): For his work on completing the OpenSearch API specification by adding missing APIs and fixing numerous spec errors. Tokesh also helped us reach 100% test coverage for the spec.

Author: The spec is not complete yet, esp with new features from the servers that have yet to be filled. Torekeldi helped us backfill the existing API with missing endpoints and parameters.
